Adding the fetch_boston documentation (#961)
fairlearn/fairlearn: docs/user_guide/datasets.rst

Datasets
==========

Revisiting the Boston Housing Dataset
-------

Introduction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Boston Housing dataset is one of three datasets currently callable in fairlearn's *datasets* module. In the past, it has commonly been used for benchmarking in popular machine learning libraries, including scikit-learn and open-ml. However, as the machine learning community has developed awareness about fairness issues with popular benchmarking datasets, the Boston Housing data has been phased out of many libraries. We migrated the dataset to fairlearn after it was phased out of scikit-learn in June 2020. The dataset remains in fairlearn as an example of how system racism can occur in data and to show the effect of fairlearn's assessment and pre-/in-/post-processing tools on real, problematic data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Boston Housing dataset has commonly been used for benchmarking in popular machine learning libraries, including scikit-learn and open-ml. However, as the machine learning community has developed awareness about fairness issues with popular benchmarking datasets, the Boston Housing data has been phased out of many libraries. We migrated the dataset to fairlearn after it was phased out of scikit-learn in June 2020. The dataset remains in fairlearn as an example of how systemic racism can be embedded in data. 
```

**We wrote this blog post to achieve the following goals:**
  * Educate users about the history of the dataset and the bias contained therein
  * Show users how bias manifests in the data and in downstream modelling tasks
  * Suggest best practices for dealing with the Boston Housing data and alternative benchmarking datasets

.. _dataset_origin:

Dataset Origin and Use
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Contrary to expectation, the Boston Housing dataset was not developed for economic purposes. `Harrison and Rubenfield (1978) <https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/22636/0000186.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y>` developed the dataset to illustrate the issues with using housing market data to measure consumer willingness to pay for clean air. The authors use a `hedonic pricing <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/h/hedonicpricing.asp>` approach, which assumes that the price of a good or service can be modeled as a function of features both internal and external to the good or service. The input to this model was a dataset comprising the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, with the *NOX* variable serving as a proxy for air quality. The  paper sought to estimate the median value of owner-occupied homes (now *MEDV*), and included the remaining variables to measure other neighborhood charactersitics. Further, the authors took the derivative of their housing value equation with respect to *NOX* to measure the "amount of money households were willing to pay with respect to air polution levels in their census tracts". The variables in the dataset are representative of the early 1970s and come from a mixture of surveys, administrative records, and other research papers. While the paper does define each variable and suggest its impact on the housing value equation, it lacks reasoning for including that particular set of variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contrary to expectation, the Boston Housing dataset was not developed for economic purposes. `Harrison and Rubenfield (1978) <https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/22636/0000186.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y>` developed the dataset to illustrate the issues with using housing market data to measure consumer willingness to pay for clean air. The authors use a `hedonic pricing <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/h/hedonicpricing.asp>` approach, which assumes that the price of a good or service can be modeled as a function of features both internal and external to the good or service. The input to this model was a dataset comprising the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, with the *NOX* variable serving as a proxy for air quality. The paper sought to estimate the median value of owner-occupied homes (now *MEDV*), and included the remaining variables to measure other neighborhood characteristics. Further, the authors took the derivative of their housing value equation with respect to *NOX* to measure the "amount of money households were willing to pay with respect to air polution levels in their census tracts". The variables in the dataset are representative of the early 1970s and come from a mixture of surveys, administrative records, and other research papers. While the paper does define each variable and suggest its impact on the housing value equation, it lacks reasoning for including that particular set of variables.
```

    >>> print(grouped_metric.by_group)
        accuracy precision    recall false positive rate true positive rate  \
    B                                                                            
    False  0.852459      0.92  0.766667            0.064516           0.766667   
    True   0.863636  0.909091  0.833333                 0.1           0.833333   

        selection rate count  
    B                           
    False       0.409836    61  
    True             0.5    66  

    >>> grouped_metric = MetricFrame(metrics=metrics,
    ... y_true=y_test,
    ... y_pred=predicted,
    ... sensitive_features=X_test["LSTAT"])
    >>> print(grouped_metric.by_group)
        accuracy precision    recall false positive rate true positive rate  \
    LSTAT                                                                        
    False  0.901639  0.910714  0.980769            0.555556           0.980769   
    True   0.818182       1.0  0.142857                 0.0           0.142857   

        selection rate count  
    LSTAT                       
    False       0.918033    61  
    True        0.030303    66  

.. _discussion:

Discussion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Boston housing dataset is rife with ethical issues, and in general, we strongly discourage using it. We've kept it in fairlearn because of its potential as a teaching tool for how to deal with ethical issues in a dataset. There are ways to `debias the data <https://scikit-lego.netlify.app/fairness.html>`, but other benchmark datasets exist that do not present these issues.

Reviewer: I would prefer to not use the word 'debias' here.

Reviewer 2: Some more context on this: https://fairlearn.org/main/contributor_guide/how_to_talk_about_fairness.html

What they probably mean by debias is to try to mitigate some of the issues. Since it's not possible to fully "debias" we try to stay away from that term as it may lead people to believe that it is indeed possible.

Author: I replaced "debias" with "remove correlations between sensitive features and the remaining columns" in a recent commit. Please let me know if that edit is satisfactory or if you have other suggestions.

> It's important to keep the differences between the way Harrison and Rubenfield used the dataset and the way modern machine learning practicioners have used it in focus. Harrison and Rubenfield conducted an empirical econometric study, the goal of which was to determine the causal impacts of these variables on median home value. Interpretation of causal models involves looking at model coefficients to ascertain the effect of one variable on the depedent variable, holding all other factors fixed. This use case is different than the typical supervised learning exercise, where the goal is to predict house values using the signals in the dataset. Harrison and Rubenfield also made many choices about what to include in the dataset and how to represent those features, and they do not sufficiently defend their inclusion and transformation of variables in their published work. 

Reviewer: Again, please highlight the different *consequences* of using a ML model in practice (i.e. as a predictive model to set prices) compared to a descriptive model to understand the past.

I am not 100% convinced by the argument that these variables should not have been included in the study by Harrison and Rubenfield. I am definitely not an expert on housing prices in the 1980's but the assumption that the proportion of Blacks in a neighborhood affect the house prices (unfortunately) does not seem very far-fetched. I think the primary objection to using this dataset for benchmarking is that it implies that the dataset is suitable for predictive modeling, not that the original use of the dataset was necessarily problematic.

Author: I think you're correct that what we want to highlight here is the danger of using the dataset for predictive modelling, though I might disagree that the way they used the data in their original use case was sound (they made some methodological choices that are not easily defensible). At any rate, this should be a fast fix and I can make the edits today. Question though, should I make the edits inline here or offline and then re-commit the edited file?

Reviewer: I'm definitely not an expert on environmental economics and haven't read the paper - so I'll take your word for it! If you have the time (and interest), could you perhaps give a short summary of which choices were not easily defendable and why? If there's a lesson there that could be relevant to our audience it would be great to include it in one way or another (from the current text it just wasn't immediately obvious to me what that lesson was).

Re. edits: with inline edits, do you mean committing suggested changes or directly editing the file on Github? If it's the former, I'd definitely just leverage Github's functionality to commit right away (if you agree with the suggestion, of course!). If you meant editing on Github vs editing your local copy offline: just go with whatever works best for you. All of these options should result in commits to your fork so for us it doesn't really matter! :)

Author: Oh yes, I meant should I edit the file directly on GitHub, but I will commit suggested changes and edit within Github! I just made a commit that addresses this comment and cuts down on the overflow lines so hopefully it's easier to review.

.. _dataset_origin:

Dataset Origin and Use
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Contrary to expectation, the Boston Housing dataset was not developed for 
economic purposes. `Harrison and Rubenfield (1978) <https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/22636/0000186.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y>`_ 
developed the dataset to illustrate the issues with using housing market data 
to measure consumer willingness to pay for clean air. The authors use a 
`hedonic pricing <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/h/hedonicpricing.asp>`_ 
approach, which assumes that the price of a good or service can be modeled as a 
function of features both internal and external to the good or service. The 
input to this model was a dataset comprising the Boston Standard Metropolitan 
Statistical Area, with the nitric oxides concentration (*NOX*) 
serving as a proxy for air quality. 
The paper sought to estimate the median value of owner-occupied homes (now 
*MEDV*), and included the remaining variables to measure other neighborhood 
characteristics. Further, the authors took the derivative of their housing 
value equation with respect to nitric oxides concentration 
to measure the "amount of money households

> were willing to pay with respect to air polution levels in their census 

Reviewer 3: *pollution*

Author: good catch, thanks! will be resolved in next commit.

strongly discourage using it in predictive modelling analyses. We've kept it 
in fairlearn because of its potential as a teaching tool for how to deal with 
ethical issues in a dataset. There are ways to `remove correlations between 
sensitive features and the remaining columns 
<https://scikit-lego.netlify.app/fairness.html>`_, but other benchmark datasets
exist that do not present these issues.

It's important to keep the differences between the way Harrison and Rubenfield 
used the dataset and the way modern machine learning practicioners have used 
it in focus. Harrison and Rubenfield conducted an empirical econometric study,
the goal of which was to determine the causal impacts of these variables on 
median home value. Interpretation of causal models involves looking at model
coefficients to ascertain the effect of one variable on the depedent variable,
holding all other factors constant. This use case is different than the typical 
supervised learning analysis. A machine learning model will pick up on the 
patterns encoded in the data and use that to predict an outcome.
In the Boston housing dataset, the patterns the authors encoded through

> the *B* and *LSTAT* variables include systemic racism and class inequalities, 

Author: Yes, definitely!

> the *B* and *LSTAT* variables include systemic racism and class inequalities, 

Author: Hi @riedgar-ms, here is what I added: "*LSAT* and *B* are not mutually exclusive. One might infer that "lower-status" Black people impact house prices differently than non-"lower-status" Black people. Additionally, Black people might be more likely to be categorized  as "lower status" by the author's definition due to systemic racism.  Harrison and Rubenfield do not consider this intersectionality in their analysis; this phenomenon could be measured via an interaction variable between the two fields.  However, including only one of these variables in the analysis is not sufficient in removing the bias encoded in the removed variable from the dataset. Because these columns are related, one likely can serve as a proxy for the other. Thus, we recommend great care be taken to account for intersectionality in data."

Please let me know if you suggest different phrasing!

> the *B* and *LSTAT* variables include systemic racism and class inequalities, 

Reviewer 3: I'm not a fan of the first couple of sentences, but I like the rest of it. How about starting with something like:

> Intersectionality also requires consideration. Due to systematic racism, black people may be more likely to be categorized as "lower status" by the authors' definition. Harrison and Rubenfield do not consider....

At the very least, I don't think that 'mutually exclusive' (I'd personally prefer 'orthogonal' but others might disagree) and 'might infer' are great word choices. I'm not sure what I'd suggest as an alternative for the second, though.

And a really nitpicking point.... if there's more than one author, I believe the possessive has the apostrophe _after_ the 's.'

> the *B* and *LSTAT* variables include systemic racism and class inequalities, 

Author: Edited paragraph:

"Intersectionality also requires consideration. Due to systematic racism, Black people may be more likely to be categorized as "lower status" by the authors' definition. Harrison and Rubenfield do not consider this intersectionality in their analysis. In an econometric analysis, intersectionality could be measured via an interaction variable between the two fields. Including only one of these variables in the analysis is not sufficient in removing the bias encoded in the removed variable from the dataset. Because these columns are related, one likely can serve as a proxy for the other. Thus, we recommend great care be taken to account for intersectionality in data."

> the *B* and *LSTAT* variables include systemic racism and class inequalities, 

Reviewer 3: I like it (obviously).... @hildeweerts and @romanlutz ?

Datasets
==========

Revisiting the Boston Housing Dataset
-------

Introduction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Boston Housing dataset is one of three datasets currently callable in 

Reviewer 2: nit: since we may add more datasets, this text is almost certain to get outdated without us noticing.
```suggestion
The Boston Housing dataset is one of the datasets currently callable in 
```

> fairlearn's *datasets* module. In the past, it has commonly been used for 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:mod:`fairlearn.datasets` module. In the past, it has commonly been used for 
```
This should link directly to the module's API reference 🙂

benchmarking in popular machine learning libraries, including scikit-learn and 
open-ml. However, as the machine learning community has developed awareness 
about fairness issues with popular benchmarking datasets, the Boston Housing 
data has been phased out of many libraries. We migrated the dataset to  
fairlearn after it was phased out of scikit-learn in June 2020. The dataset  
remains in fairlearn as an example of how system racism can occur in data  
and to show the effect of fairlearn's assessment and pre-/in-/post-processing  
tools on real, problematic data. 

**We wrote this blog post to achieve the following goals:**
  * Educate users about the history of the dataset and its bias
  * Show users how bias manifests in the data and in downstream modelling tasks
  * Suggest best practices for dealing with the Boston Housing data and 
  alternative benchmarking datasets

.. _dataset_origin:

Dataset Origin and Use

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Contrary to expectation, the Boston Housing dataset was not developed for 

> economic purposes. `Harrison and Rubenfield (1978) <https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/2027.42/22636/0000186.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y>` 

Reviewer 2: I think links require the following syntax
```
`text <link>`_
```
The underscore seems to be missing. You can check if it works by building the docs locally. Perhaps I'm wrong, but you may want to check all the links in your PR.

Author: Oh ok, I will add the underscore throughout!

developed the dataset to illustrate the issues with using housing market data 
to measure consumer willingness to pay for clean air. The authors use a 
`hedonic pricing <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/h/hedonicpricing.asp>` 
approach, which assumes that the price of a good or service can be modeled as a 
function of features both internal and external to the good or service. The 

> input to this model was a dataset comprising the Boston Standard Metropolitan 

Reviewer 2: Is there a link where one can read up on what Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area means? It sounds like a very well-defined area.

Author: Yes, I will add a link to Census documentation!

Reviewer 2: I don't actually know if links can go over multiple lines. Did you try it out? In such cases it's no problem to use more than the 79 maximum line length.

Author: Hm no I did not try it out, I am going to render the docs this weekend and post what I get.

Author: I built the docs and the links rendered correctly when they were on one line. I am a little reluctant to try splitting the links out over multiple lines to stay under the line length maximum because I have a feeling it won't work. So I will keep them as a single line for now!

> Statistical Area, with the *NOX* variable serving as a proxy for air quality. 

Reviewer 2: This is the first mention of NOX, so perhaps let's just spell it out as nitric oxide concentration with NOX in parentheses.

Reviewer 2: Related: Adding words means that now all the lines in the same paragraph need to be adjusted to stay below 80 characters. That's super annoying. I would know because I did that hundreds of times. @riedgar-ms recommended starting a new line for every sentence because of this, so that you save yourself that effort. Restructured text only uses new lines in the rendered text if you leave a blank line, so it won't be visible. Anyway, just a suggestion!

Author: I spelled out NOX. Thanks for the line-editing tip! I am new to the restructured text format so I appreciate any tips.

The paper sought to estimate the median value of owner-occupied homes (now 
*MEDV*), and included the remaining variables to measure other neighborhood 
characteristics. Further, the authors took the derivative of their housing 
value equation with respect to *NOX* to measure the "amount of money households
were willing to pay with respect to air polution levels in their census 

> tracts". The variables in the dataset are representative of the early 1970s 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tracts." The variables in the dataset are representative of the early 1970s 
```
sorry, I'm getting nitpicky. Just wanted to point this out as a general rule.

and come from a mixture of surveys, administrative records, and other research
papers. While the paper does define each variable and suggest its impact on 
the housing value equation, it lacks reasoning for including that particular
set of variables.

Modern machine learning practicioners have used the Boston Housing dataset as 
a benchmark to assess the performance of emerging supervised learning 
techniques. It's featured in `scipy lectures <https://scipy-lectures.org/packages/scikit-learn/auto_examples/plot_boston_prediction.html>`, 
indexed in the `University of California-Irvine Machine Learning Repository 
<https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/housing/>` and in 
Carnegie Mellon University's `StatLib <http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/boston>`, 

> and for a time was included as one of `scikit-learn's <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.datasets.load_boston.html>`

Reviewer 2: We may have to link to a previous version, pre-1.0, since they removed it now!

Author: I just removed the link here, as it this source is referenced elsewhere in the post.

 and tensorflow's standard toy datasets. It has also been the benchmark of 
choice for `many <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8556738/>` 
`machine <https://lib.dr.iastate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1187&context=imse_conf>` 
`learning <https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/1999/file/f3144cefe89a60d6a1afaf7859c5076b-Paper.pdf>`
`papers <https://arxiv.org/search/?query=boston+housing&searchtype=all&source=header>`.

> As of scikit-learn version 1.2, the dataset has been removed.

Reviewer 2: I think 1.0. 1.2 isn't out yet

Author: to be resolved in next commit

Reviewer 2: I'm sorry, I was wrong! I should have checked yesterday but didn't quite get to it. Indeed it will be removed in 1.2, which is not yet out since they just released 1.0. So it's a very nice heads up for a future version that they're giving us. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.datasets.load_boston.html?highlight=load_boston

Still, the original text wasn't quite right since it said "has been removed" rather than "will be removed".

The dataset contains the following columns:

> ============ ==================

Reviewer 2: let's make these equally long for this table

Author: to be resolved in next commit

Column Name   Description                                                          
============ ==========================================================================
CRIM         per capita crime rate by town                                         
ZN           proportion of residential land zoned for lots over 25,000 sq.ft.
INDUS        proportion of non-retail business acres per town
CHAS         Charles River dummy variable (= 1 if tract bounds river; 0 otherwise)
NOX          nitric oxides concentration (parts per 10 million)
RM           average number of rooms per dwelling
AGE          proportion of owner-occupied units built prior to 1940
DIS          weighted distances to five Boston employment centers
RAD          index of accessibility to radial highways
TAX          full-value property-tax rate per $10,000
PTRATIO      pupil-teacher ratio by town
B            1000(Bk - 0.63)^2 where Bk is the proportion of blacks by town
LSTAT        % lower status of the population
MEDV         Median value of owner-occupied homes in $1000’s
============ ============================================================================

> The cells below show basic summary statistics about the data, the dtypes of the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The cells below show basic summary statistics about the data, the data types of the 
```

columns, and the number of missing values. Note that the 
:func:`fairlearn.datasets.fetch_boston` function warns user by default that the
dataset contains fairness issues. Setting :code:`warn=False` will turn the

> warning off. To return the dataset as a data frame, pass 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
warning off. To return the dataset as a :class:`pandas.DataFrame`, pass 
```

:code:`as_frame=True` and call the *data* attribute.

For more information about how to use the :code:`fetch_boston` function, 

> visit the `fairlearn datasets documentation 

Reviewer 2: It would be preferable to link using restructured text since it will always link to the same version.
```
:mod:`fairlearn.datasets`
```

Reviewer 2: same below

Author: Done, can see in latest commit

<https://fairlearn.org/v0.7.0/api_reference/fairlearn.datasets.html#id15>`. 

.. note::

    Calling the :func:`fairlearn.datasets.fetch_boston` function will raise a 
    :code:`FairnessWarning`.
    For more information on this warning refer to
    `https://fairlearn.org/v0.7.0/api_reference/fairlearn.datasets.html 
    <https://fairlearn.org/v0.7.0/api_reference/fairlearn.datasets.html>`_.

.. doctest:: datasets

    >>> from fairlearn.datasets import fetch_boston
    >>> import pandas as pd

> 

Reviewer 2: Does this work properly with blank lines? Maybe try running it and paste a screenshot if it works. I'd be very surprised if it does.

Author: I removed the blank lines so hopefully it will work!

Author: UPDATE: removing the blank lines does render the code correctly. Here's a screenshot! I will resolve this comment. 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15962391/136202570-ef75ca0e-44e8-4951-a931-4a4b680f7a1e.png)

    count	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000
    mean	3.613524	11.363636	11.136779	0.554695	6.284634	68.574901	3.795043	408.237154	18.455534	356.674032	12.653063	22.532806
    std	8.601545	23.322453	6.860353	0.115878	0.702617	28.148861	2.105710	168.537116	2.164946	91.294864	7.141062	9.197104
    min	0.006320	0.000000	0.460000	0.385000	3.561000	2.900000	1.129600	187.000000	12.600000	0.320000	1.730000	5.000000
    25%	0.082045	0.000000	5.190000	0.449000	5.885500	45.025000	2.100175	279.000000	17.400000	375.377500	6.950000	17.025000
    50%	0.256510	0.000000	9.690000	0.538000	6.208500	77.500000	3.207450	330.000000	19.050000	391.440000	11.360000	21.200000
    75%	3.677083	12.500000	18.100000	0.624000	6.623500	94.075000	5.188425	666.000000	20.200000	396.225000	16.955000	25.000000
    max	88.976200	100.000000	27.740000	0.871000	8.780000	100.000000	12.126500	711.000000	22.000000	396.900000	37.970000	50.000000    

.. _dataset_issues:

Dataset Issues
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the dataset is widely used, it has significant ethical issues. As 

> explained in scikit-learn's `documentation <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.datasets.load_boston.html#rec2f484fdebe-2>`, 

Reviewer 2: also best to link to the last version of sklearn that has this dataset (?)

Author: to be resolved in next commit

> Datasets

Reviewer 2: I feel like we should provide a full list of references used for this as well. I'm sure several of Vincent's blogs/videos/etc. provided the foundation for this. A few are mentioned in #507 I think. If there's no direct reference we can always acknowledge these resources as inspiration/foundation and link to them for people to check out. Wdyt?

Author: Yeah, would that go under the References section? How would we cite them, in the same way as the papers?

developed the dataset to illustrate the issues with using housing market data 
to measure consumer willingness to pay for clean air. 

The authors use a `hedonic pricing <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/h/hedonicpricing.asp>`_ 
approach, which assumes that the price of a good or service can be modeled as a 
function of features both internal and external to the good or service. 

The input to this model was a dataset comprising the `Boston Standard Metropolitan 
Statistical Area <https://www.census.gov/history/www/programs/geography/metropolitan_areas.html>`_, with the nitric oxides concentration (*NOX*) 
serving as a proxy for air quality.

The paper sought to estimate the median value of owner-occupied homes (now 
*MEDV*), and included the remaining variables to measure other neighborhood 
characteristics.

Further, the authors took the derivative of their housing 
value equation with respect to nitric oxides concentration 
to measure the "amount of money households
were willing to pay with respect to air pollution levels in their census 
tracts." 

> The variables in the dataset are representative of the early 1970s 

Author: I have rephrased accordingly!

and come from a mixture of surveys, administrative records, and other research
papers. 

While the paper does define each variable and suggest its impact on 
the housing value equation, it lacks reasoning for including that particular

> set of variables.

Author: Hi @romanlutz, yes can you please elaborate?

Modern machine learning practicioners have used the Boston Housing dataset as 
a benchmark to assess the performance of emerging supervised learning 
techniques. 

It's featured in `scipy lectures <https://scipy-lectures.org/packages/scikit-learn/auto_examples/plot_boston_prediction.html>`_, 
indexed in the `University of California-Irvine Machine Learning Repository 
<https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/housing/>`_ and in 
Carnegie Mellon University's `StatLib <http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/boston>`_, 
and for a time was included as one of scikit-learn's

>  and tensorflow's standard toy datasets. 

Author: Hmm idk, will check on that.

 
It has also been the benchmark of choice for `many <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8556738/>`_ 
`machine <https://lib.dr.iastate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1187&context=imse_conf>`_ 
`learning <https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/1999/file/f3144cefe89a60d6a1afaf7859c5076b-Paper.pdf>`_

> `papers <https://arxiv.org/search/?query=boston+housing&searchtype=all&source=header>`.

Author: Oh ok, got it. I added all the papers to a References section but may need to clean that up later down the line.

DIS          weighted distances to five Boston employment centers
RAD          index of accessibility to radial highways
TAX          full-value property-tax rate per $10,000
PTRATIO      pupil-teacher ratio by town
B            1000(Bk - 0.63)^2 where Bk is the proportion of blacks by town
LSTAT        % lower status of the population
MEDV         Median value of owner-occupied homes in $1000’s
============ ============================================================================

The cells below show basic summary statistics about the data, the data types of the 
columns, and the number of missing values.

Note that the :func:`fairlearn.datasets.fetch_boston` function warns user by 
default that the dataset contains fairness issues. 

Setting :code:`warn=False` will turn the warning off. 

To return the dataset as a :class:`pandas.DataFrame`, pass 
:code:`as_frame=True` and call the *data* attribute.

For more information about how to use the :code:`fetch_boston` function, 
visit :mod:`fairlearn.datasets`. 

.. note::

    Calling the :func:`fairlearn.datasets.fetch_boston` function will raise a 
    :code:`FairnessWarning`.

>     For more information on this warning refer to :mod:`fairlearn.datasets`.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit too close to the API reference for my taste. I'd just keep the part about "for more information about how to use the function visit <link to API reference>.

Author: I have removed the note.

.. doctest:: datasets

    >>> from fairlearn.datasets import fetch_boston
    >>> import pandas as pd

>     >>> X, y = fetch_boston(as_frame = True, return_X_y= True)
>     >>> boston_housing = pd.concat([X, y], axis = 1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    >>> X, y = fetch_boston(as_frame=True, return_X_y=True)
    >>> boston_housing=pd.concat([X, y], axis=1)
```

    4	0.06905	0.0	2.18	0	0.458	7.147	54.2	6.0622	3	222.0	18.7	396.90	5.33	36.2

    >>> boston_housing.describe()
        CRIM	ZN	INDUS	NOX	RM	AGE	DIS	TAX	PTRATIO	B	LSTAT	MEDV
    count	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000	506.000000
    mean	3.613524	11.363636	11.136779	0.554695	6.284634	68.574901	3.795043	408.237154	18.455534	356.674032	12.653063	22.532806
    std	8.601545	23.322453	6.860353	0.115878	0.702617	28.148861	2.105710	168.537116	2.164946	91.294864	7.141062	9.197104
    min	0.006320	0.000000	0.460000	0.385000	3.561000	2.900000	1.129600	187.000000	12.600000	0.320000	1.730000	5.000000
    25%	0.082045	0.000000	5.190000	0.449000	5.885500	45.025000	2.100175	279.000000	17.400000	375.377500	6.950000	17.025000
    50%	0.256510	0.000000	9.690000	0.538000	6.208500	77.500000	3.207450	330.000000	19.050000	391.440000	11.360000	21.200000
    75%	3.677083	12.500000	18.100000	0.624000	6.623500	94.075000	5.188425	666.000000	20.200000	396.225000	16.955000	25.000000
    max	88.976200	100.000000	27.740000	0.871000	8.780000	100.000000	12.126500	711.000000	22.000000	396.900000	37.970000	50.000000    

> .. _dataset_issues:

Reviewer 2: same for this marker: `_boston_dataset_issues`

Author: Done

Dataset Issues
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the dataset is widely used, it has significant ethical issues.

As explained in :func:`sklearn.datasets.load_boston`, 

> Harrison and Rubenfield developed the *B* under the assumption that racial 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Harrison and Rubenfield developed the feature *B* under the assumption that racial 
```

self-segregation had a positive impact on house prices. 

*B* then is a measure of systemic racism, as it encodes racism as a factor in house pricing. 

Thus, any models trained using this data that do not take special care to process *B* 

> will learn to use mathematically encoded racism as a factor in house price prediction.

Reviewer 2: It's worth noting that excluding this variable or other variables alone doesn't necessarily solve the issue either (keyword: "fairness through unawareness"). However, explicitly encoding this and using it as a discriminative feature seems like asking for trouble (unless it's used in some other way to combat this very type of harm).

Author: I included the following at the bottom of that section: "It's also important to note that merely excluding these variables from the dataset will not ensure that the model does not discriminate. However, through careful assessment, the negative effects of these variables can be mitigated.". Let me know if that works!

Harrison and Rubenfield describe their projected impact of the problematic 
variables as follows. 

Both variables come from the 1970 US Census. 
- *LSTAT*: "Proportion of population that is lower status = 0.5 * 
(**proportion of adults without some high school education and proportion of 
male workers classified as laborers**). The logarithmic specification implies 
that socioeconomic status distinctions mean more in the upper brackets of 
society than in the lower classes."
- *B*: "Black proportion of population. At low to moderate levels of B, 
an **increase in B** should have a **negative influence on housing value** 

> if Blacks are regarded as undesirable neighbors by Whites. However, market 

Reviewer 2: Just FYI but this reminded me that we should at some point sort out whether we want to use Whites over White people, Blacks over Black people, etc. so I opened #970 . Feel free to chime in!

> discrimination means that housing values are higher at very high levels of B. 

Reviewer 2: "housing values are higher at very high levels of B" --> I'm not sure I understand. From the previous sentence "Blacks are regarded as undesirable neighbors by Whites" I would have inferred the oppositie.

Author: Hm so I think what the authors were trying to communicate is that house values would be higher in neighborhoods that were self-segregated (all White or all Black) and that if Whites regard Blacks as undesirable neighborhoods, then as more Blacks move into an all- or mostly-White neighborhood, the housing value would fall in tandem. I am not sure I agree with that logic, but it's the author's assumption :)

original Census data mapping for all the points in the *B* variable. 

The definition of the *LSTAT* variable is also suspect. 
Harrison and Rubenfield define lower status as a function of the proportion
of adults without some high school education and the proportion of male workers 
classified as laborers. 

However, the categorization of a certain level of 
education and job category as indicative of "lower status" is reflective of
social constructs of class and not objective fact.

Again, the authors provide no evidence of a proposed relationship between
*LSTAT* and *MEDV* and do not sufficiently justify its inclusion 
in the hedonic pricing model.

The inclusion of these columns might make sense for an econometric analysis, 
which seeks to understand the causal impact of various factors on a dependent 
variable, but these columns are problematic in the context of a predictive
analysis. 

Predictive models will learn the patterns of systemic racism and classism 
encoded in the data and will reproduce those patterns in their predictions.

The next section describes the potential risk in using this dataset in a 
typical machine learning prediction pipeline.

> .. _harms_assessment:

Author: Done

fairness-related Harms Assessment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As explained above, machine learning models that use the Boston Housing dataset 
are at risk of generating fairness-related harms. 

How does that look in a typical machine learning pipeline? 

> Because both the sensitive and target feaures are continuous, to leverage 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because both the sensitive and target features are continuous, to leverage 
```

    >>> pipe.fit(X_train, y_train)
    >>> predicted = pipe.predict(X_test)

    >>> import sklearn.metrics as skm
    >>> from fairlearn.metrics import demographic_parity_difference,
    ... MetricFrame,
    ... false_positive_rate,
    ... true_positive_rate,
    ... selection_rate,
    ... count

    >>> DP_B = demographic_parity_difference(y_true = y_test, 
    ... y_pred = predicted, 
    ... sensitive_features = X_test["B"])
    >>> DP_LSTAT = demographic_parity_difference(y_true = y_test, 
    ... y_pred = predicted, 
    ... sensitive_features = X_test["LSTAT"])

    >>> print(f"Demographic parity difference:\nB: {DP_B}\nLSTAT: {DP_LSTAT}")
    Demographic parity difference for:
    B: 0.0901639344262295
    LSTAT: 0.8877297565822156

Checking the demographic parity differences shows that neither variable has a 
demographic parity at zero, implying a different selection rate across groups. 

The next series of tables dives deeper into the breakdown of various metrics by
group. 

The proportion of Blacks higher than the median is associated with a 
higher false positve rate. 

*B* == True is also associated with a slightly lower precision. 

> The accuracy, recall, and selection rate when *LSTAT* == 
> True all are lower than when *LSTAT* is False. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The accuracy, recall, and selection rate when *LSTAT* is `True` all are lower than when *LSTAT* is `False`. 
```

    True   0.863636  0.909091  0.833333                 0.1           0.833333   

        selection rate count  
    B                           
    False       0.409836    61  
    True             0.5    66  

    >>> grouped_metric = MetricFrame(metrics=metrics,
    ... y_true=y_test,
    ... y_pred=predicted,
    ... sensitive_features=X_test["LSTAT"])
    >>> print(grouped_metric.by_group)
        accuracy precision    recall false positive rate true positive rate  \
    LSTAT                                                                        
    False  0.901639  0.910714  0.980769            0.555556           0.980769   
    True   0.818182       1.0  0.142857                 0.0           0.142857   

        selection rate count  
    LSTAT                       
    False       0.918033    61  
    True        0.030303    66  

.. _discussion:

Discussion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Boston housing dataset presents many ethical issues, and in general, we 
strongly discourage using it in predictive modelling analyses. 

We've kept it in fairlearn because of its potential as a teaching tool 
for how to deal with ethical issues in a dataset. 

> There are ways to `remove correlations between sensitive features and the remaining columns 
> <https://scikit-lego.netlify.app/fairness.html>`_, but other benchmark datasets
> exist that do not present these issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are ways to `remove correlations between sensitive features and the remaining columns 
<https://scikit-lego.netlify.app/fairness.html>`_, but that is by no means a guarantee that fairness-related harms won't occur. Besides, other benchmark datasets
exist that do not present these issues.
```

That link should probably point to our CorrelationRemover's API reference page?

It's important to keep the differences between the way Harrison and Rubenfield 
used the dataset and the way modern machine learning practicioners have used 
it in focus. 

Harrison and Rubenfield conducted an empirical econometric study,
the goal of which was to determine the causal impacts of these variables on 
median home value. 

Interpretation of causal models involves looking at model

> coefficients to ascertain the effect of one variable on the depedent variable,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
coefficients to ascertain the effect of one variable on the dependent variable,
```

holding all other factors constant. This use case is different than the typical 
supervised learning analysis. 

A machine learning model will pick up on the 
patterns encoded in the data and use that to predict an outcome.
In the Boston housing dataset, the patterns the authors encoded through
the *B* and *LSTAT* variables include systemic racism and class inequalities, 
respectively. 

A predictive model will learn to use those patterns to make a prediction. 

Using the Boston housing dataset as a benchmark for a new 
supervised learning model means that the model's performance is in part due to
how well it learns and replicates the patterns in this dataset.

If you are searching for a house pricing dataset to use for benchmarking 
purposes or to create a hedonic pricing model, scikit-learn recommends the 
California housing dataset (:func:`sklearn.datasets.fetch_california_housing`)
or the `Ames dataset <https://inria.github.io/scikit-learn-mooc/python_scripts/datasets_ames_housing.html>`_ 
in place of the Boston housing dataset, as these datasets do not generate
fairness-related harms. 

We recommend you proceed with extreme caution when 

> calling the Boston housing data from fairlearn, and hope this article gives 

Author: I have capitalized it everywhere!

    25%	  0.082045	  0.000000	  5.190000	  0.449000	  5.885500	  45.025000	 2.100175	  279.000000	17.400000	 375.377500	6.950000	  17.025000
    50%	  0.256510	  0.000000	  9.690000	  0.538000	  6.208500	  77.500000	 3.207450	  330.000000	19.050000	 391.440000	11.360000	 21.200000
    75%	  3.677083	  12.500000	 18.100000	 0.624000	  6.623500	  94.075000	 5.188425	  666.000000	20.200000	 396.225000	16.955000	 25.000000
    max	  88.976200	 100.000000	27.740000	 0.871000	  8.780000	  100.000000	12.126500	 711.000000	22.000000	 396.900000	37.970000	 50.000000    

.. _boston_dataset_issues:

Dataset Issues
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the dataset is widely used, it has significant ethical issues.

As explained in :func:`sklearn.datasets.load_boston`, 
Harrison and Rubenfield developed the feature *B* under the assumption that racial 
self-segregation had a positive impact on house prices. 

*B* then is a measure of systemic racism, as it encodes racism as a factor in house pricing. 

Thus, any models trained using this data that do not take special care to process *B* 
will learn to use mathematically encoded racism as a factor in house price prediction. 

> Harrison and Rubenfield describe their projected impact of the problematic 

Author: Done (quite a while ago, going to resolve this)!

which seeks to understand the causal impact of various factors on a dependent 
variable, but these columns are problematic in the context of a predictive
analysis. 

Predictive models will learn the patterns of systemic racism and classism 
encoded in the data and will reproduce those patterns in their predictions.

It's also important to note that merely excluding these variables from the dataset
will not ensure that the model does not discriminate.

However, through careful assessment, the negative effects of these variables
can be mitigated.

The next section describes the potential risk in using this dataset in a 
typical machine learning prediction pipeline.

.. _boston_harms_assessment:

Fairness-related harms assessment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As explained above, machine learning models that use the Boston Housing dataset 
are at risk of generating fairness-related harms. 

How does that look in a typical machine learning pipeline? 

Because both the sensitive and target features are continuous, to leverage 
Fairlearn's assessment capabilities, we need to apply column transformations 
to turn this problem into a classification problem. 

> The code below maps *LSTAT*, *B*, and *MEDV* to binary values 

Author: @hildeweerts I edited the cutoff for B to represent the 0.1369 threshold, but I am not super happy with the results. I'd be interested in hearing thoughts from the maintaners. Would it make sense to just exclude B from the analysis due to how difficult it is to interpret?

Further, the authors took the derivative of their housing 
value equation with respect to nitric oxides concentration 
to measure the "amount of money households were willing to pay 
with respect to air pollution levels in their census tracts." 
The variables in the dataset were collected in the early 1970s 
and come from a mixture of surveys, administrative records, and other research
papers. 
While the paper does define each variable and suggest its impact on 
the housing value equation, it lacks reasoning for including that particular
set of variables.

Modern machine learning practitioners have used the Boston Housing dataset as 
a benchmark to assess the performance of emerging supervised learning 
techniques. 
It's featured in `scipy lectures <https://scipy-lectures.org/packages/scikit-learn/auto_examples/plot_boston_prediction.html>`_, 
indexed in the `University of California-Irvine Machine Learning Repository 
<https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/housing/>`_ and in 
Carnegie Mellon University's `StatLib <http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/boston>`_, 
and for a time was included as one of scikit-learn's and tensorflow's standard toy datasets

> (see :func:`tf.keras.datasets.boston_housing`). 

Author: Yep, will do that @hildeweerts

> (see :func:`tf.keras.datasets.boston_housing`). 

Author: @hildeweerts @romanlutz So I think this is the correct way to refer to the Tensorflow API: https://github.com/GPflow/tensorflow-intersphinx/. I committed an updated version of the _conf_ file to this branch, so please let me know if this will work!

It's important to keep the differences between the way Harrison and Rubenfield 
used the dataset and the way modern machine learning practicioners have used 
it in focus. 
Harrison and Rubenfield conducted an empirical econometric study,
the goal of which was to determine the causal impacts of these variables on 
median home value. 
Interpretation of causal models involves looking at model
coefficients to ascertain the effect of one variable on the dependent variable,
holding all other factors constant. This use case is different than the typical 
supervised learning analysis. 
A machine learning model will pick up on the 
patterns encoded in the data and use that to predict an outcome.
In the Boston housing dataset, the patterns the authors encoded through
the *B* and *LSTAT* variables include systemic racism and class inequalities, 
respectively. 
Using the Boston housing dataset as a benchmark for a new 
supervised learning model means that the model's performance is in part due to
how well it learns and replicates the patterns in this dataset.

The Boston Housing dataset raises the more general issue of whether it's valid to 

> port datasets constructed for one specific use case to different use cases.

Author: @mmadaio I committed an updated version of the Fairness and Machine Learning page where the only updates are refs to the various sections (in case someone else wants to reference that page in the future). Please let me know if it looks right!

a benchmark to assess the performance of emerging supervised learning 
techniques. 
It's featured in `scipy lectures <https://scipy-lectures.org/packages/scikit-learn/auto_examples/plot_boston_prediction.html>`_, 
indexed in the `University of California-Irvine Machine Learning Repository 
<https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/housing/>`_ and in 
Carnegie Mellon University's `StatLib <http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/boston>`_, 
and for a time was included as one of scikit-learn's and tensorflow's standard toy datasets
(see :mod:`tf.keras.datasets.boston_housing`).
It has also been the benchmark of choice for many machine learning 
`papers <https://arxiv.org/search/?query=boston+housing&searchtype=all>`_ [#2]_ [#3]_ [#4]_.
In 2020, users brought the dataset's fairness issues to the scikit-learn development team 
(see scikit-learn issue `#16155 <https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/16155>`_), after which the team decided to remove the dataset in scikit-learn version 1.2.
In scikit-learn version 1.2, the dataset will be removed.

The dataset contains the following columns:

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer 2: seems like the result of a merge conflict
```suggestion
```

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 7 30
   :stub-columns: 1

   *  - Column name
      - Description
   *  - CRIM
      - per capita crime rate by town
   *  - ZN
      - proportion of residential land zoned for lots over 25,000 sq.ft.
   *  - INDUS
      - proportion of non-retail business acres per town
   *  - CHAS
      - Charles River dummy variable (= 1 if tract bounds river; 0 otherwise)
   *  - NOX
      - nitric oxides concentration (parts per 10 million)
   *  - RM
      - average number of rooms per dwelling
   *  - AGE
      - proportion of owner-occupied units built prior to 1940
   *  - DIS
      - weighted distances to five Boston employment centers
   *  - RAD
      - index of accessibility to radial highways
   *  - TAX
      - full-value property-tax rate per $10,000
   *  - PTRATIO
      - pupil-teacher ratio by town
   *  - B
      - 1000(Bk - 0.63)^2 where Bk is the proportion of Black people by town
   *  - LSTAT
      - % lower status of the population
   *  - MEDV
      - Median value of owner-occupied homes in $1000’s

> =======
> ============ ==========================================================================
> Column Name   Description                                                              
> ============ ==========================================================================
> CRIM         per capita crime rate by town                                         
> ZN           proportion of residential land zoned for lots over 25,000 sq.ft.
> INDUS        proportion of non-retail business acres per town
> CHAS         Charles River dummy variable (= 1 if tract bounds river; 0 otherwise)
> NOX          nitric oxides concentration (parts per 10 million)
> RM           average number of rooms per dwelling
> AGE          proportion of owner-occupied units built prior to 1940
> DIS          weighted distances to five Boston employment centers
> RAD          index of accessibility to radial highways
> TAX          full-value property-tax rate per $10,000
> PTRATIO      pupil-teacher ratio by town
> B            1000(Bk - 0.63)^2 where Bk is the proportion of Black people by town
> LSTAT        % lower status of the population
> MEDV         Median value of owner-occupied homes in $1000’s
> ============ ============================================================================
> >>>>>>> 1585b1845afec0d40c8f88dd5a829d00ff3fc969

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
seems like the result of a merge conflict

The cells below show basic summary statistics about the data, the data types of the 
columns, and the number of missing values.

Note that the :func:`fairlearn.datasets.fetch_boston` function warns users by 
default that the dataset contains fairness issues. 

Setting :code:`warn=False` will turn the warning off. 

To return the dataset as a :class:`pandas.DataFrame`, pass 
:code:`as_frame=True` and call the *data* attribute.

For more information about how to use the :code:`fetch_boston` function, 
visit :mod:`fairlearn.datasets`. 

.. doctest:: datasets
    :options:  +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE

    >>> import warnings
    >>> warnings.filterwarnings('ignore')
    >>> from fairlearn.datasets import fetch_boston
    >>> import pandas as pd
    >>> pd.set_option('display.max_columns', 20)
    >>> pd.set_option('display.width', 80)
    >>> X, y = fetch_boston(as_frame=True, return_X_y=True)
    >>> boston_housing=pd.concat([X, y], axis=1)

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
seems like the result of a merge conflict

    >>> with pd.option_context('expand_frame_repr', False):
    ...    boston_housing.head()
          CRIM    ZN  INDUS CHAS    NOX     RM   AGE     DIS RAD    TAX  PTRATIO       B  LSTAT  MEDV
    0  0.00632  18.0   2.31    0  0.538  6.575  65.2  4.0900   1  296.0     15.3   396.90   4.98  24.0
    1  0.02731   0.0   7.07    0  0.469  6.421  78.9  4.9671   2  242.0     17.8   396.90   9.14  21.6
    2  0.02729   0.0   7.07    0  0.469  7.185  61.1  4.9671   2  242.0     17.8   392.83   4.03  34.7
    3  0.03237   0.0   2.18    0  0.458  6.998  45.8  6.0622   3  222.0     18.7   394.63   2.94  33.4
    4  0.06905   0.0   2.18    0  0.458  7.147  54.2  6.0622   3  222.0     18.7   396.90   5.33  36.2

> =======
>     >>> boston_housing.head()
>                CRIM    ZN  INDUS CHAS    NOX     RM   AGE     DIS RAD    TAX  PTRATIO  \
>         0  0.00632  18.0   2.31    0  0.538  6.575  65.2  4.0900   1  296.0     15.3   
>         1  0.02731   0.0   7.07    0  0.469  6.421  78.9  4.9671   2  242.0     17.8   
>         2  0.02729   0.0   7.07    0  0.469  7.185  61.1  4.9671   2  242.0     17.8   
>         3  0.03237   0.0   2.18    0  0.458  6.998  45.8  6.0622   3  222.0     18.7   
>         4  0.06905   0.0   2.18    0  0.458  7.147  54.2  6.0622   3  222.0     18.7   
> 
>                 B  LSTAT  MEDV  
>         0  396.90   4.98  24.0  
>         1  396.90   9.14  21.6  
>         2  392.83   4.03  34.7  
>         3  394.63   2.94  33.4  
>         4  396.90   5.33  36.2  
>        <BLANKLINE>
>        [5 rows x 14 columns]
>     
> >>>>>>> 1585b1845afec0d40c8f88dd5a829d00ff3fc969

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
seems like the result of a merge conflict
